So one thing that happens a lot of times in 
our job is as we are going through troves of  

psychological research, we will stumble across a 
particular concept or a piece of research that I  

will find particularly profound. I will feel like 
it explains so much of what happens in the world,  

so much human behavior, so much of the bullshit 
that we seem to deal with on a day-to-day basis,  

and I personally see it as part of my job is to 
like publicize some of these lesser-known research  

findings that might have wide implications. Now, 
this happened maybe five years ago. There's a  

concept called prevalence-induced concept change. 
It was found by some researchers at Harvard. I  

included it in my second book, "Everything 
Is Fucked: A Book About Hope," and then I  

did a short-form video about it, maybe late last 
year, like last December, and it went absolutely  

bananas. Fucking crazy, like 10 million views. 
And what's so interesting about this concept is  

like you can go through the comments underneath 
that video, and you will find examples of people  

of every political stripe, everywhere on the 
spectrum, every background, ethnicity, belief  

system, religion, and they are all saying, "Oh, 
this explains the people I disagree with." It's  

almost comical how universal this concept applies. 
And so this episode, what I wanna do is I wanna,  

like, dig into the research together, talk about 
what this concept is, why it's so important,  

and just talk through a lot of the examples of 
where we see the Blue Dot Effect in the everyday  

world, how it explains why people are seemingly 
upset despite their circumstances being great,  

why people feel like the world is getting worse, 
even though, by most objective metrics, it's  

getting better, and why people are just assholes 
on the internet all the time to each other.

[Narrator] 20 million books 
sold, zero fucks given. It's  

"The Subtle Art of Not Giving a Fuck 
Podcast" with your host, Mark Manson.

Hey, everybody, thank you for listening. And just 
one last thing, really quick. We are doing an  

annual listener survey. If you have anything that 
you love about the show, you hate about the show,  

you wish I was talking about more, please 
go to the link below in the show notes. Got  

a quick survey, just takes a few minutes to 
fill out. It helps me and my team out a ton,  

and it helps us deliver great podcasts 
for you. So go to markmanson.net/tellme,  

T-E-L-L-M-E. Thank you very much. Talk to you 
again soon. Why don't we start with just a  

quick summary, Drew, of what the research says, 
and then we'll get into the significance of it.

Yeah, so the original study for this, they 
called it the prevalence-induced concept change,  

like you already said. We're calling it the Blue 
Dot Effect 'cause that's a lot more sexy and easy  

to understand, and it's because the first study 
they did in this was using blue dots. They showed  

people screens with a bunch of blue dots on it 
and told them, "Pick out the blue dots from all  

the other dots on the screen." Most of 'em were 
like shades of purple and stuff like that. And  

at first, they say, "Pick out the blue dots," and 
they pick out the blue dots really well at first.  

And then, slowly, over time, they start reducing 
the number of blue dots on the screen, and people  

start mistaking more and more purple dots for 
blue dots. Their concept of a blue dot expands-

Right.

as blue dots become less and 
less frequent on the screen.

Yeah, so this is the important principle-

Right.

is that when you remove the blue 
dots, people don't recognize that  

the blue dots are no longer there. They 
redefine what is blue for themselves.

Exactly. Their definition of a blue dot 
expands to include more shades of purple-

Yeah.

as the prevalence of those blue dots becomes 
less and less. Okay, big deal, right?

Yeah.
That's just with some dots.

Whatever, yeah.

The really interesting part about this study, 
though, was that they started to generalize  

it to other areas, too. So like the next study 
they did with this was with threatening faces. So  

they showed people a whole bunch of faces on the 
screen, and a lot of them are threatening faces,  

and they say, "Okay, pick out the threatening 
faces." People are really good at this at  

first. But again, what they do is they start 
reducing the frequency of threatening faces  

on the screen, and people start mistaking the 
not-so-threatening faces for threatening faces-

Interesting.

as it goes on and on, right? This generalizes 
to other things, too. They did a series of like  

six or seven studies with this. One of them 
they did was what they call moral violations.  

They presented people with stories. So, no 
longer visual information. Just stories of,  

okay, we're gonna do this study. Is this 
study ethical or not, right? And at first,  

they just have some egregiously unethical 
studies that they're showing people,  

and the really high frequency of those studies is 
what they offer them. And then they start giving  

them examples of, ah, kind of like borderline 
cases, and then cases that are pretty benign.  

Same thing happens. As you give them more and 
more kind of benign or not-so-unethical studies,  

people start thinking that, oh, 
these studies are unethical, too.

[Mark] Mm-hmm.

So this is very generalizable across 
domains. They find this in all sorts  

of areas. It's a very robust effect that 
they find, and just absolutely fascinating.

So, to translate that for listeners a little 
bit, basically, when you tell people to find  

threatening things or unethical things, and there 
are a lot of threatening things or unethical  

things, people will very accurately identify 
what's threatening or unethical. But as you  

remove the threats and the unethical things, 
people don't recognize that there are fewer  

threats or unethical things. They redefine 
what is threatening and what is unethical-

Yes.

to continue to see them. This reminds me, 
like there's a quote in "Subtle Art," where  

I actually quote the artist Jose Marti who 
said this. He said that "when confronted  

with a life of no problems, the mind 
will quickly set about inventing some."

Yeah.

And, to me, this is like a 
perfect reflection of that,  

that like the easier our life gets, the more 
we define smaller and smaller inconveniences  

and infractions as being unbearable, 
as being impossible to withstand.

It happens everywhere. It's so insidious, yeah.

Let's actually start broad-

Okay.

and get narrow.

Yeah, okay.

Because I think when everybody hears this, 
and this is especially gauged by the comments,  

and I think this is probably why this video 
went so viral, it's because people of all  

political stripes see this, and they're 
like, "Oh, that explains wokeism," or,  

"That explains racism," right? It's 
like objectively, there are fewer  

incidences of racism happening in society, 
yet the expansion of racism keeps growing.

Right, the definition of racism, yeah, it expands.

Right. You could make the same argument with 
censorship. Like censorship, as society has  

become less censored and more free of expression, 
I mean, we have the fucking internet, like it is-

It's the Wild West.

Like, you can literally say 
whatever the fuck you want.

Yeah.

There's always a platform you can go say it. 
Yet, people's perception of censorship has  

grown and inflated so that even the smallest 
things like a tweet getting shadow banned or  

somebody getting kicked off YouTube is like 
deemed a violation of freedom of speech.  

There's all of these political vectors around 
political issues that the Blue Dot Effect is  

kicking into gear, and that people are perceiving 
drastic threats and infractions where, you know,  

30, 40, 50 years ago, these would've just been, 
they wouldn't have even been a news story.

The media kind of feeds on this, too, right?

Mm-hmm.

The negativity bias in the media. They've 
even seen this over the last 30 or 40 years,  

like you just said. More negative 
reporting has been shown in the data  

over that 30 to 40-year period, and even though 
things have gotten better, poverty's gone down,  

crime has gone down since then, the media's 
definition of negativity expands as well.

Crime's a great one. That's a 
paradox that's kinda come up a lot,  

you know, the last few years is this 
obsession over a growing crime rate,  

yet when you look at long-term trends, it's 
crime is basically the lowest it's been-

Especially violent crime, yeah.

since they've started measuring it. Public safety 
is an interesting one. Neighborhoods and schools  

and just society in general is technically, I 
mean, there's fewer drunk driving accidents,  

there's fewer car accidents, there's fewer child 
predators, there's fewer violent criminals,  

yet kids aren't allowed to go outside and play 
by themselves. Parents are getting arrested for  

letting their kids wander down the street by 
themselves. There's this kind of hysteria over  

safetyism, over protecting young people at all 
costs. It's another area where the safer that  

society has become, our perceptions of it don't 
stay accurate. We simply move the goalpost back,  

and we start imagining threats where 
they objectively weren't there before.

There's a little bit of a chicken and 
an egg thing there, though, right? Like,  

some people could probably argue that, 
well, the reason that crime has gone  

down is 'cause we're more vigilant, 
and we're more aware of it, right?

Yeah.

There's probably that argument as 
well. I think if you look at the data,  

the lag is the other way, though. 
Like, crime started going down-

For sure.

first, and then we got crazy about 
safety and everything like that, yeah.

For sure, well, and there's also a weird thing 
that has happened. You know, this kinda ties into  

the negativity bias in the news media, which 
is that there are fewer crimes, but a higher  

proportion of the crimes are publicized 
in a pretty horrific and spectacular way.

You see this in the data, too, just 
about like, you know, how many people  

are killed by police officers every year, or 
if you segregate it by race, too, you know,  

how many Black people, how many white people, 
how many whatever. People way overestimate,  

way overestimate on every single one of 
those categories actually, too, yeah.

Totally, police brutality-

Yeah, yeah.

you could put into this as well. It's 
probably the lowest it's been, I don't know,  

ever. This ties into, it's like how much of this 
is the prevalence-induced concept change of like,  

just the lack of bad things happening, so 
you perceive things to be worse than they are  

versus how publicized and viral the negative 
events become. I do think it's some of both.  

Like, it's interesting when I think 
about the time I spent in countries  

that just objectively have practically 
no crime. Like, I remember I was living,  

I spent half of 2021 in New Zealand, and one 
of my favorite things was to go to New Zealand  

websites and read the headlines. Like, read, 
like, what they thought of as a catastrophe.

Right, right.

You know, it was just, I found it absolutely 
hysterical. I remember there was one day where  

there was like a news broadcast came on, people 
were protesting outside of the prime minister's  

home. You know, they're upset, and I'm like, 
"Oh, man, like, what's going on? What did she  

do?" And it turned out that there was like, there 
wasn't enough funding for bus lanes or something,  

and people were just up in arms about that, and 
they wanted her to resign. Like, to the point  

where like they were going and picketing outside 
of her house, and I was like, "Man, if that's  

what gets you to go picket, like I wanna know, 
like, where are the real problems, you know?"

But it's a fascinating part of human psychology, 
though, Mark, if you think about it. Like,  

what makes us just look for problems  

constantly? I mean, there's obviously 
an evolutionary benefit to it, right?

Yeah.
Like, stay vigilant, everything like that,

but that is to the extreme. Like everything 
could be perfect, and we'll make up things.

Problems give us a sense of meaning. We need 
something to resist against to feel that sense of  

progress, to feel as though our life is generating 
value. The intensity of like what the problem is,  

you know, things get normalized in both directions 
very quickly. Like, if you live in a war zone,  

your perception of problems is going to 
adjust itself accordingly, right? Like,  

a school getting blown up or, you know, a 
shooting for somebody who lives in South Sudan  

or Somalia or something, like, it's not even 
gonna register. It's just gonna be a Tuesday.

So, in this study, they also found that 
when you add the blue dots back in,  

you start increasing the 
frequency of the blue dots-

Yeah.

people don't-

They don't adapt back?

They don't adapt back, right.

Interesting.

So they, yeah, so I'm sure that probably 
generalizes as well. As things get worse,  

people are like, "Meh, you know, whatever."

Interesting.

Yeah, it's really fascinating. And that's the 
other thing. Like they've done so many things,  

they'll tell people, "We're going to reduce 
the number of blue dots." They'll tell them  

that in the studies. Doesn't matter, they still 
mistake the purple dots, or go in the other way,  

too. They're just like, "We're gonna increase the 
blue dots." People just don't, they can't adapt.

I wonder how much of this ties into, so one of 
the researchers on these studies was Dan Gilbert,  

who I'm a fanboy of, and I hope one day comes 
on this podcast. Dan Gilbert is like one of the  

originators of this concept of a psychological 
immune system, which is this idea that our  

satisfaction with our lives tends to always 
hover around like a seven out of 10. And a  

really positive event, you know, you get married, 
you have a child, you win the lottery, you know,  

it'll bump you up to a eight or nine temporarily, 
but there's like this center of gravity back down  

by a seven, 6 1/2 to a seven, and it's the 
same thing on the other end. Like, you know,  

something terrible happens in your life, you 
dip for a while, and then you eventually get  

pulled back up. This feels almost like a corollary 
theory of just pain instead of happiness. Like,  

there's a certain amount of problems that you 
seem to need to have in your life, that you  

need to perceive in your life to maintain a sense 
of meaning and purpose, and when the environment  

around you gets absolutely terrible and abysmal, 
your definition of problem will adjust itself  

accordingly to kinda keep yourself at that 
moderate amount of problem. And then, if there are  

no problems in your environment, your definition 
of a problem will also adjust accordingly until  

you hit that threshold to give you a sense of 
meaning and purpose. So I don't know if he would  

agree with that, but I see a parallel between 
those two things. It's also, it's something that  

I'm definitely, I'm gonna feel like a fucking 
old man now, but like, I sometimes worry, I was  

talking to somebody about this recently, about how 
we're quickly approaching a point where everybody  

who lived through World War II is gonna be dead in 
probably the next decade or two. Because I think,  

within society, it's important to have a certain 
demographic of people who have that perception,  

whose baseline level of like what a problem is, 
is pretty drastic 'cause it keeps everybody else  

in check. Like, if everybody else, their lives 
are like too cushy and comfortable, then they're  

gonna start getting upset over spilled milk all 
the time, and they're gonna generate a lot of  

political strife over things that are just kind 
of objectively not there. But if you have that  

cohort of people who have actually seen some shit 
and actually lived through some serious problems,  

they can kinda be the check and balance 
on the rest of the population that hasn't.

Yeah, yeah, well, interestingly, when 
I was digging around with this, too,  

I found there was a recent study 
in 2023 that the older you get,  

the less affected you are by the 
Blue Dot Effect, by this, yeah.

Interesting. So the more objective you see things?

Well, I don't know. See, 
that brings up the question,  

are you just more rigid in your thinking as you 
get older? Which is kinda the stereotype, right?

Right.

And are you too loose when you're younger,  

too loose in your subjective moral judgments? 
Or like, so that brings up the question, like,  

is there a balance of the rigidity of your 
thinking? And if it varies by age, I mean,  

yeah, that makes sense. Like, you know, back in 
my day, this was so much worse or whatever, right?

Yeah, I mean, it's also just when you're older, 
you have a greater reservoir of experience-

Yeah.
to draw upon, right?

Right. Right.

So it's like, you've seen thousands and thousands 
of threatening and nonthreatening faces,  

so you're less likely to be fooled, or you're less 
likely to have your definition of threatening be  

altered so quickly and easily. Whereas, if you're 
young, and you've never really been in threatening  

situations, your definition of threatening 
is gonna move pretty quickly and easily.

Right, right, that balance. And you're right, I 
think there needs to be a cohort in society that  

is more rigid in their thinking and holding, 
like, okay, this isn't actually as bad as it is.  

Young people, let me teach you, you know? We are 
getting to be like a lot of like finger wagging-

We are, dude.
at the young people.

Dude.

But I think there is something to that. 
And if you look at right now, a lot of,  

you know, the kind of civil discourse 
that's going on, it does seem to be,  

there is a lot of like young versus old 
kind of rigid thinking versus this is the  

new way of thinking, and that's how it 
happens every generation, I know, but.

Yeah, yeah.

That's playing out at scale right now.

All right, really quick, first the sponsor, 
then back to this. This episode is sponsored  

by Shopify. Shopify is a powerhouse behind 
millions of thriving businesses across the  

globe. Whether you're dealing with handmade soaps 
or high-end electronics, Shopify simplifies the  

entire selling process, both online and in person. 
Frees you up to focus on expanding your business  

empire. If you're a small business owner, Shopify 
is an all-in-one solution to seamlessly link you  

to customers, whether they're shopping in 
a physical store, your online site, or even  

through social media platforms like TikTok, 
Facebook, or Instagram. Shopify propels your  

business forward with industry-leading tools that 
are incredibly user-friendly, so you don't have to  

be a tech guru or a design wizard to master your 
market. With Shopify, you're in the driver's seat  

of both your business and your brand. And should 
challenges arise, Shopify's 24/7 support and an  

extensive library of business courses are right 
there to guide you. Every step of the way, you've  

got a partner in Shopify, ensuring your journey 
is as successful as it is revolutionary. I don't  

understand what's revolutionary about this, but 
anyway, sign up for a $1 per month trial period at  

shopify.com/idgaf. That's $1 for your first month, 
shopify.com/idgaf, stands for I don't give a fuck,  

but I do give a fuck about selling shit online. 
That's why I like Shopify. One of the things I  

noted down, which I wonder, I kinda wish we had 
an old person here to ask them. I wonder if the  

internet exacerbates this psychological phenomenon 
because we are presented with so much information  

online. You know, it's the equivalent of being 
exposed to like tons and tons of blue dots,  

so it's like if the effect of this requires a 
certain, like perceiving a certain amount of  

phenomena to have your definitions altered, 
then increasing the quantity of phenomena  

that you're perceiving is gonna alter your 
definitions quicker than it would otherwise.

Right, right. It compresses the time.

Exactly, you can literally get 
on TikTok, and within 30 minutes,  

your definition of what's threatening and what's 
not has changed. Whereas, in past generations,  

you know, maybe that happens over 
the course of a year or two years.

Well, I think that it almost has 
to be. In the studies that they do,  

going to the original study with the blue dots, 
they show them like tons and tons of blue dots,  

and they do, I think it's like a 
couple hundred trials with each person.

Wow.

So it is over a lot of trials. So I 
think you're right. If you increase  

the amount of information there, you're 
basically compressing the time needed.

So maybe that's another argument for 
an information diet of like limiting  

your informational consumption simply to 
maintain objectivity as much as possible.

Definitely, yeah, I don't know. I know with 
me, I just don't, I don't watch a lot of news  

anymore. I don't consume very much of media in 
general, not a whole lotta social media, and  

I have just found that like I just don't have as 
many strong opinions as I used to have, for sure.

Me too, and it's funny. I stopped 
watching news a few years ago,  

and I had the same experience. I felt like I 
got more objective the less news I consumed,  

and that made no sense to me. And then I 
remember, 'cause I wrote an article about this,  

I remember going and digging into some 
research, and they actually found across  

the population that people who watch 
the most news are the least informed-

Yeah, yeah.

which makes no sense. Well, until 
you actually watch the news.

On the surface it doesn't. Yeah, yeah.

It isn't until you actually watch 
the news, then it makes total sense.

When you see how people are consuming 
news, then it makes sense, yeah.

Absolutely, and when you see how 
the news is portrayed. right?

Right.

Like, it's more infotainment than information. 
It's everything has an angle, everything has a  

headline, everything is, it's optimized for 
emotional reaction and emotional impact and,  

in some cases, political impact more so than 
actual like sharing of objective information.  

So that's not entirely surprising, but it is just 
such a bizarre thing that it's one way to look  

at it is, like, as you raise your threshold 
of what information can get through to you,  

it means the only things that get through 
are things that are very high quality,  

that have been vetted, that have been 
shared and discussed multiple times for  

a long period of time. It's the same thing 
as like eating less more nutritional food.

Right.
Like, you're probably just gonna end up healthier.

Right, just like one kind of example 
I just thought of of that is election  

polls. You know, we're in an election year 
right now. Election polls this early on,  

like almost none of them historically 
have ever even come close to being right.

Yeah.

And yet, people like obsess over them now, right?

Yeah.

And so it's like you're not as 
objective. Like you were just saying,  

you know, you're not as objective if 
you're paying attention to the micro,  

if you step back and just like 
breathe, yeah, a little bit more.

Totally.

There's this kind of weird thing going 
on right now where objectively, you've  

kind of already alluded to this, objectively, 
things are getting better for a lot of people.

Mm-hmm.

Yes, inequality. Like there's this big 
gap between the haves and have-nots still,  

but like, objectively, your average person, 
if you would go back 100 years or whatever,  

the median person out there is doing 
better than they were 100 years ago.

I've seen this in a couple places, 
and it's true. A poor person today,  

like if you are somebody who's on the threshold 
of poverty in a first-world country today,  

you objectively live better than kings 
lived in the 19th century, point blank.

So, yeah. So while that's 
happening, at the same time-

Yes.

there's a perception that things are getting 
worse for a large number of people as well,  

and the kind of standard explanation I've 
seen so far for it is that gap in inequality.  

It's that, yes, as our psychology adapts-

Yes.

to better things, we look around more, and we 
see, oh, somebody else has it even better than  

I do. I think that explains part of it, but now 
you have the Blue Dot Effect on top of that, too,  

I think, that explains some of this as well, 
where it's just built into our psychology that  

when things get better, we just don't notice 
it. Things getting better is discounted.

So economics is another great example.

Yeah.

Like you mentioned, we're 
in election year right now,  

and when they poll people about how 
they feel about the American economy,  

it's terrible. The polling reflects as if 
we're in a recession right now, yet, by all  

the economic data, the economy's doing great, 
yet nobody's happy still despite everything.

Right, right. And the Blue Dot 
Effect seems as like that might  

be carrying a lot of that, it seems like, yeah.

Yeah. What's actually really weird about the 
economic stuff is that, at least in the US,  

people's perception, now we're kinda getting 
off on a tangent, but like people's perception  

of how good the economy is maps really 
well to just which president's in office-

Oh, yeah, yeah.

which is fucking depressing as 
shit. Like, come on, people.

And that's gotten tighter over 
the last like 20 years, too.

Yeah.
Like, that switch, as soon as it-

Oh.

it just flips.

Instantaneous.

Yeah, yeah. It's insane.

Instantaneous. Well, let's talk about some 
of the personal stuff because there's a lotta  

interesting kinda individual examples of 
this, and, you know, this is something I've  

absolutely noticed with the definition of health, 
right? Like, back when I was really unhealthy,  

my definition of being unhealthy was like drinking 
eight cocktails and eating half a pizza at three  

in the morning, right? It was just absolute 
abomination of a consumption evening. Whereas,  

like today, even I'm like so much healthier on 
all these metrics, the same amount of guilt that  

I used to feel when I used to get absolutely 
plastered and eat like an entire pizza,  

I feel that same guilt when I, like, have 
a candy bar and maybe eat an extra slice  

of pizza or something. I don't know, like 
it is so minuscule the things that, like,  

trigger guilt in me now, which is weird because 
you would think that, like, now that I'm healthy,  

I don't have that food guilt anymore, but I still 
have just as much guilt. It's just the definition  

of what makes me feel guilty, the goalposts 
have moved so far back that like, the slightest  

infraction, I'm like, "Ah, man, why did I have a 
third piece of chocolate? Like, I'm disgusting."

Yeah, no, I know. I beat myself up for every  

little bite of dessert that I have or 
anything like that. I totally get it.

I've seen it. I've had some friends who 
were into bodybuilding in the past, too,  

and you see it. There's like 
an aesthetic version of this,  

where I've had friends who are into bodybuilding, 
and they're like, "Oh, bro, I'm like so outta  

shape right now." And I'm like, "What are you 
talking about? Like, you're fucking jacked."

Right, right.

They're like, "Man, no, I'm like, I'm up 
to like 13% body fat. I can't see my bottom  

abs anymore. Like, I'm a mess." And I'm like, 
"That's offensive. Like, stop talking to me."

Mm-hmm, mm-hmm, no, for sure. Yeah, 
fitness, too. You could do the same thing  

with just like workouts or whatever. 
Now that I've been working out more,  

if I don't get a good workout in, I'm kinda like, 
"Oh, that's such bullshit, like I should have-

Yeah, right?
like a better workout." And that's like-

Yeah, or like you skip a set, and you're like-

Yeah, yeah.

you spend the next, the whole drive home 
being like, "Why'd I skip that set?"

Yeah, so what's considered unhealthy 
has now expanded to all of these small,  

minor things that really aren't unhealthy.

As the unhealthy behaviors become less prevalent,  

we expand our definition of unhealthy behavior 
so that we always feel miserable about ourselves.

Right, yeah, yeah. No, for sure.

I can't tell you how many emails I've gotten from  

readers and listeners over the years 
that have just been like, you know,  

"I'm improving my life in X way. When am I gonna 
stop feeling bad for this thing?" And then like.

Yeah, really.

And my answer, I just always 
wanna be like, "You're not."

Yeah.
"You're not. Sorry, bro, like."

Yeah. It goes back, Mark, to the whole, 
you know, choose your problems, right?

[Mark] Yeah.

The solution for it in some ways is, and this 
is your big thing, too, one of your big things,  

choose your problems really well. Your 
mind is gonna create problems. There's  

always gonna be problems in your life, but 
you could also get to a point, you know,  

where if you're in this space, and 
you're working on yourself a lot,  

and you are making progress, there is a 
tendency to now focus on every little thing.

Yes.

And the things that aren't important. And 
so, like, yeah, you should give a fuck about  

things that really are important and be very, 
very cognizant of that as things get better.

Well, and I think the tricky part is  

catching yourself when your expansion 
of the definition has gone too far.

Mm, yes.

That it starts when you've become that guy 
who like can't sleep at night 'cause he hit  

12% body fat, or when you're the straight 
A student who hates themselves because they  

got an A minus on their last exam. When 
your definitions of something have become  

so stringent and so just uncompromising 
that you are making yourself miserable,  

it's difficult to catch yourself in those moments, 
and I think that's where the skill of like,  

just learning to let go and just like being 
comfortable with imperfection is really key.

Yeah, that was a lesson I took 
from like therapy, I think.

Yeah.

And we've kind of talked about this before. 
You've touched on it a couple other episodes  

as well with guests, is that kinda like you 
go to therapy, and once you kinda have like  

the bedrock and the solid foundation and the big 
things kind of, I'm not gonna say under control,  

but you have a grasp of them, don't 
go looking for all the little things.

Right.

I had this experience. Actually, this 
is how you can tell a good therapist,  

for one, is that they will tell you, they're like, 
"Look, we don't have to solve every little thing."

Yes.

And I had a therapist tell me that. That was a 
big, like, click for me. I was like, "Yes, okay,  

great." She's like, "I'm here to give you a few 
tools that you can use out in the real world-"

Yes.

"to apply to the things when they actually 
do, you know, when this comes up. You don't  

have to solve every little fucking 
thing when you come in here with me."

Totally.
So that's another area where-

That's actually, that segues perfectly. I 
think, emotional problems, right, so it's-

Yeah, yeah.

you'll see people with like very deep-seated 
insecurities, debilitating anxiety, they work for  

years to solve it, and their immediate reaction 
is to look for the next insecurity or anxiety  

to solve. And eventually, you get to a point, and 
this is where you get into like self-help addicts  

and stuff. Like, I've met self-help addicts that, 
like, they will obsess over, you know, there'll  

be like an awkward conversation with their partner 
at dinner, and they will spend the next three days  

obsessing over it. And it's like, well, sometimes, 
just awkward conversations happen. Like,  

you don't need to go solve this. You don't need to 
like do breathing exercises and journal about it.  

At a certain point, the attempt to solve all of 
your problems becomes the problem. I think a lot  

of it is just like recognizing when is it enough? 
Like, when are you good? When are you just like,  

okay, I've not solved all my anxiety issues, but 
I'm good, I'm set. I can make it through life at  

this level, and I'm gonna have a good life. Like, 
the trick is to find that moment. Stand back.

You've talked about that before. 
You've talked about how like,  

even now, you're still like, 
I still get socially anxious.

Yeah.

That's still a problem. And definitely-

Yeah.
for me too, yeah.

The thing that I overdid was like dating 
and relationship stuff when I was younger.

You think you overdid it? 
Like writing a book about it.

Pff, like running, running a web business-

You think you overdid that?

for five years around it? Yeah, 
writing hundreds of articles.

Slightly overshot that one.

You think, yeah. It was interesting because I 
remember, after I wrote "Models," I kinda had  

this moment where I was like, "I'm retiring from 
this industry." And when I left the industry,  

I kinda shut that part of my brain off as well. 
You know, like that part that I used to go on  

dates, and I've like analyzed everything 
that was happening on the date. It's like,  

"Oh, well, she laughed really hard. Like, was 
that a genuine laugh, or like, maybe I should say  

this again 'cause that'll get her to laugh again." 
You know, like all that, like, kinda overanalysis  

that was happening, I just stopped doing all that 
stuff. And it was funny because my dating life got  

better than it'd ever gotten before immediately 
as soon as I stopped doing that stuff. That was  

like kinda the big aha of that experience of 
like, oh, I passed. There's a threshold where  

the attempt to solve the problems becomes the 
bigger problem than the actual problems, and  

I passed that threshold a long time ago, and so 
giving up actually makes you better at that point.

Yeah, it's hard to find that spot, I 
guess, for a lot of people. Especially,  

you're a fish in water at a 
certain point, too, right? Like,  

that you're surrounded by it, and you can't 
quite see the forest for the trees, yeah.

Right, you don't know that that's not normal.

Right, yeah.

Let's take a quick break. Ever feel fucking 
old, like a wrinkly bag of ass? Well, yeah,  

me, too. That's why this episode is brought to you 
by Timeline. Timeline isn't just a run-of-the-mill  

life science company. They're like the Einstein 
making you feel like you're aging backwards. Their  

big ingredient is something called Mitopure, which 
targets mitochondria, which is a word I hadn't  

thought about since ninth-grade biology class. 
But it turns out, Mitopure is able to target old  

mitochondria stuck within your cells, which then 
helps you get more energized and helps your body  

process things more efficiently. Basically, it 
makes you feel like less of an old fuck. It's  

just two little soft gels a day. I take them with 
my morning smoothie, which apparently Timeline  

has a berry powder thing for smoothies, too, 
if you're into that sort of thing. But, hey,  

I'm sure it's fucking great. So here's the deal, 
10% off your first order of Mitopure. If you go  

to timeline.com/idgaf, that stands for I don't 
give a fuck, you will get 10% off your first  

order of Mitopure, timeline.com/idgaf. Let's 
stop getting old. Let's stay young together,  

baby. Let's stay young forever. Okay, this is 
getting weird. Just go buy the thing. What else?

Just more like, we're kind of on the subject of 
mental health here, just more in the mental health  

realm, this happens as well. And actually, in the 
medical community in general, but specifically,  

in the mental health world where expansions of 
definitions of things like depression, trauma,  

ADHD, all of these things, where we've identified 
the problem, we know how prevalent the problem is,  

we think we have a grasp on the problem, 
and then we start applying it to edge cases,  

you know, or less severe cases, and all of 
a sudden, the definition expands into all  

these other areas. For example, with 
ADHD. You were diagnosed with ADHD.

Yeah.

And you're pretty sure you, 
like that's a legit diagnosis-

Yeah, yeah, yeah.
right, and you had it-

For sure.

developmentally and everything like that. There's 
a lotta debate right now. There's a few camps in  

the psychiatry world about whether it's 
being overdiagnosed or not right now.

Yeah.

And, you know, there's ways, it's interesting. In 
like the medical community, in the mental health  

community, they have ways of trying to figure 
out if something is being overdiagnosed. And  

basically, one of the criteria is, they don't 
call it this, but is the Blue Dot Effect taking  

over? You know, do we have a hammer, and we're 
just looking for nails at this point? And there  

are some people who think, you know, ADHD is 
being overdiagnosed in some populations and  

maybe underdiagnosed in others, but there's a big 
debate going on around it. And if you read it,  

and you read it knowing the Blue Dot Effect, 
you see this, this whole backdrop to it.

Well, something funny happens, too, and I think 
medical diagnoses is a good example of this. Like,  

when the definition of something expands 
to become so broad that it envelopes,  

like, a very significant percentage of 
the entire population, it kinda loses  

its meaning as a disorder. Like, if 40% of the 
population has something, is that a disorder?

Right, yeah, right.

No, it's just a trait.

Right, right.

It's just a difference.

Uh-huh.

I mean, you see this in everything, right? 
Like, you see this, the definition of trauma.  

If anything painful is a trauma, then the 
meaning of trauma has no significance,  

right? It's like, okay, well, cool, 
everything's trauma. Who gives a shit?

Right.
Right?

The definition of trauma has 
expanded to include stress as well.

It's interesting because I generally 
think that the people who push for  

the expansion of definitions do so with 
good intentions of like not enough people  

are recognizing their trauma. More 
people should work on their trauma.

100%, yeah.

Let's make people more aware of their trauma,  

and then the definition of trauma expands 
to the point that people are like, "Well,  

if that's trauma, then there's no point 
in paying attention to it," right?

Right.
Because it's such a quotidian, insignificant,

banal thing that happens all the time. And 
you see this over and over again. You see  

it in politics. Like, you see it in 
everything. Definitions are funny.

Right, yeah, and the damage comes in 
overtreatment, too, in that, right?

Yes.

And so, especially like something, a developmental 
disorder like ADHD, if you're gonna be treating  

teenagers, you know, they don't even have a 
frontal lobe in their brain, basically, you know?

Yeah, yeah.

And you're giving them psychoactive drugs for 
these edge cases, you know, that's the worry.

Yeah.

Whether that's going on or not, that's the 
debate. I don't know for sure where that  

line is being drawn. Some people think 
we're overdiagnosing and overtreating,  

but that's where the damage comes, is when 
the intervention is worse than just leaving  

it alone and dealing with it in a way that 
can be, you know, not as invasive. So, yeah.

Yeah, rub some dirt on it.

Rub some dirt on it. Again, our 
old man way of wagging our fingers-

Oh, dude.
at the kids here.

I know, I know. So this is something I've been 
thinking about lately is journaling. And I think,  

speaking of being an old man, I think this 
is something I haven't appreciated until  

recently. I always thought about the value of 
journaling was in kind of just the therapeutic  

act of writing your thoughts out on paper and 
like the way it forces you to organize your  

thoughts and feelings in a very real way in your 
mind to help process them, I guess. What I never  

considered before, probably 'cause I was too 
young to really consider it, is the value that  

comes with having a record of how you felt and 
perceived things at a previous point in time.

Oh.

If the Blue Dot Effect is as significant 
as we're discussing here, then, to me,  

that raises the value and utility of journaling. 
Because let's say your definition of trauma in  

your life or your definition of injustice in your 
life has expanded, and these things usually expand  

unconsciously. We don't realize that they've 
expanded. Then, having a documentation of how  

you felt about these things, say, five years 
ago before you read all those news stories,  

before you watched all those TikToks, and 
seeing like, huh, oh, interesting. Like,  

I didn't feel this way about these things in my 
life at that time. Maybe that's a reality check.  

I mean, maybe it's also just like, wow, I was 
so naive and stupid five years ago. You know,  

I've had that experience with journals before. 
And I've talked to a lotta people who've had  

that experience where it's like their memory of 
something is terrible, and then they go back and  

read the journal from when it happened, and 
they're like, "Oh, it actually wasn't nearly  

as terrible as I've kind of built it up to be 
in my head." So, yeah, I don't know. That's a  

concept that I've been kinda dwelling on. I 
feel like I should be journaling more, Drew.

I have started to try to journal more recently, 
too, and I kinda have like, I have like,  

I don't know, 12 notebooks laying around and 
like 13 different notes in my phone, and emails  

I send to myself and stuff like that, and I'm 
trying to like gather 'em all into one place.

Oh, yeah.
'Cause I think that's a good way to do it, too.

Yeah.

Yeah.

Yeah, I've journaled sporadically throughout 
my life. It's usually when things are going  

wrong. Like, that's kinda when I'm like, I 
need to write. I need to write shit down.  

But then things will go well for two or 
three years, and I won't write anything,  

and I'm reaching an age where I'm 
starting to like regret that a little.

It's kinda like prayer. You only pray 
to God when things are going wrong.

Totally.

You only pray to God when 
things are going wrong, right?

Yes, hey, God. Sorry I haven't talked to 
you for a while, but I need something.

[Drew] Derek Sivers brought this up, though,  

too. You remember that? He said that he's been 
keeping a daily journal for, like, years now.

Yeah.

And he talked about a relationship he was going 
through. It's been so good, what happened? And  

he went back and read it and was like, "Oh, no. 
Actually, it was kinda terrible the whole time."

Yeah, that's a perfect example.

Yeah.

I mean, the definition expansion aside,  

our memories of things are 
completely skewed as well, you know?

Atrocious, yeah.

And you see, and again, to kinda bring it 
back to the political, this is why I started  

replacing news with reading history, and it was 
a complete game changer for me because people  

don't remember history. Like, people think 
whatever is wrong now is the worst it's ever  

been. It's the worst. It's an absolute calamity. 
And then you just go start reading some history,  

and you're like, "Oh my God, like just 
40 years ago, it was 10 times worse."

Right, yeah.

You know, and it gives you context to understand 
what's happening now. So I definitely see that  

now. You know, obviously, that we've got two 
prominent wars going on in the world. People  

are upset about 'em. They are terrible. But, dude, 
just go pick up a fucking history, like read some  

basic history about both of those regions, Ukraine 
and Russia and Israel and Gaza, and it's like,  

there is nothing happening right now that is 
like particularly unprecedented, you know?

Right.

Or just completely unforeseen. Like, there is like 
multi-century history behind both of these events.  

They have been much, much worse and egregious 
in the past than they are now. All right,  

I think, let's end this. Dan Gilbert, one of 
the psychologists behind this that I referenced  

earlier, he has a beautiful way of putting this. 
He said, "Solving problems causes us to expand our  

definitions of them. When problems become rare, we 
count more things as problems. Our studies suggest  

that when the world gets better, we become harsher 
critics of it, and this can cause us to mistakenly  

conclude that it hasn't actually gotten better at 
all. Progress, it seems, tends to mask itself."

[Drew] Yeah, that's a good line.

Fucking great man.

He's brilliant.

And that is true on the personal 
as well as the political.

Yeah.

Progress tends to mask itself. You 
don't recognize it when it's there  

all the time. And sometimes, when 
you think it's there, it's not.

Right.
So, awesome. Well, anything else to say?

That's all I got.

That's all you got?

Mm-hmm.

All right. Well, thank you, everybody. 
Maybe we should expand our definition of  

a podcast into new and more fun things in the 
future. So, please, like and subscribe to the  

show. Let us know what you think in the 
comments. Feel free to send us an email,  

mark@markmanson.net, drew@markmanson.net, 
and we will see you next time.


